A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
AI
Generative AI
Copyright
Creativity
Originality
Artificial intelligence
Data
Feist
David Guetta
ChatGPT
Input
Output
Machine Learning
Authorship
Intellectual Property

This paper takes the occasion of French DJ David Guetta’s use of generative AI tools to create lyrics and a voice in
the style of Eminem, which he then used in one of his concerts, as the basis for an exploration of the shifting
meaning of creativity and originality in the age of generative AI. Our main contention is that the Guetta form of
creativity with generative AI tools differs in certain important respects from what has come before. The paper
describes an iterative, dynamic process of conception, prompting, generation, refining, and deployment to charac­
terise creativity in this context. Nevertheless, we contend that copyright – specifically the concept of originality
as articulated in US federal law – is a sufficiently durable legal mechanism that can manage these new cultural
forms, and that the two basic requirements of modern copyright law (a tangible medium of expression and a
modest degree of creativity) remain relevant in identifying the scope of legal protection.
The paper argues that the David Guetta story reveals something more general about creativity in a digital age,
namely that while hybrid-networked (i.e., human – corporate – machine) creators have always created hybridnetworked cultural forms (i.e., creations that blend human and technology-constituted elements), such hybrid­
ity becomes increasingly visible and complex in the context of a new world of generative AI. At the very least,
earlier – and influential – models of creativity as human-driven involving creation ex nihilo become harder to
sustain in a new age of generative AI. But this does not mean copyright or notions of originality are redundant or
that copyright law cannot accommodate Guetta and other cases.
Such an account seems important as it challenges the hegemonic and reductive view that AI “generates”
artistic works autonomously and avoids reducing the copyright issues raised by such creative works to the related
but distinct question of whether learning models rely on copyrighted data. As such, copyright law should remain
an important mechanism to facilitate genuine creators who are using AI systems in innovative and unique ways
to push the boundaries of their creativity.

1. “Let me introduce you to … Emin-AI-Em”
In February 2023, one of the most prolific dance music producers in
the world, French DJ, David Guetta, posted on his personal Instagram
account a short clip from one of his latest concerts.1 In the clip, you can
hear what appears to be Eminem’s voice saying, “This is the future rave
sound; I’m getting off the underground,” accompanied by energetic
dance music. Future Rave, or FR, is a genre of electronic music associ­
ated with Guetta and Danish DJ, Morten Breum.

Guetta explained that this was something he “made as a joke,” but it
worked “so good that I could not believe it.”2 He described how he had
discovered several generative AI websites that could be used to “create”
lyrics and voices. One of them helped Guetta generate lyrics in the style
of any artist, so he typed the prompt, “Write a verse in the style of
Eminem about the Future Rave.” He then used another generative AI
website that recreated Eminem’s voice. Finally, he combined the words
in Eminem’s voice with some music. The Instagram clip ends with
Guetta talking about the effect of his “creation” on the audience: “People

* Corresponding author: 1090 Eddy St. Atp. 403 San Francisco, CA, USA
E-mail address: pjurcys@gmail.com (P. Jurcys).
1
See <https://www.instagram.com/p/CoNqQuFqIHZ/> accessed 12 February 2023.
2
Ibid.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2023.105892
Available online 10 October 2023
0267-3649/© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

went nuts.”
Several commentators observed that this was not the first time
Guetta paid tribute to Eminem – in 2019, he played Eminem’s “Lose
Yourself” at the MDL Beast Festival.3 But on that occasion, and in
contrast to his later usage, he played Eminem’s original music (and
voice).4 However, soon after making the initial Instagram post, Guetta
gave an interview where he explained that he would not release the mix
publicly because of his respect for Eminem and the ambiguous legal
framework concerning copyright entitlements.5 In another interview to
BBC, he stated that, “I’m sure the future of music is in AI. For sure.
There’s no doubt. But as a tool. … Nothing is going to replace taste.
What defines an artist is, you have a certain taste, you have a certain
type of emotion you want to express, and you’re going to use all the
modern instruments to do that.”6
The emergence and proliferation of generative AI technologies in the
first half of 2023 spurred a huge global debate among lawyers, policy­
makers, and technologists, as well as the general public.7 The rapid
development of generative AI even caused waves of public outcry and
calls to halt the development of AI for several months or at least until
some legal, technological, and ethical guardrails are established.8
However, since many generative AI tools are open source, technology
entrepreneurs rushed to embrace the new wave of innovation and start
building specific solutions for diverse use cases across enterprise and
consumer settings.9

From a copyright law and regulatory perspective, generative AI
technologies raise important questions around four main areas. The first
area of uncertainty relates to the legality of data scraping and using
publicly available information (including content that is both protected
by copyright laws and content in the public domain) to train machine
learning and AI models.10 Here, the question arises whether the scraping
of data done by machines should be treated differently from the retrieval
of the same information by humans.11 Should permissions to use or
licenses be obtained by entities that are scraping data for machine
learning purposes?12 Should the use of data scraped from the Internet be
deemed to be a copyright infringement and thus not permissible?13 In
common law jurisdictions, for instance, one of the main issues is
whether data scraping for machine learning models could be justified
under the copyright law doctrine of fair use.14 Then there are questions
about remuneration.15
The second major area of controversy surrounding generative AI
technologies relates to data privacy and image rights issues. What if the
data scraped from the Internet contains some personal information of
individuals?16 Could such data be used to train machine learning
models? And which laws should be applied to such activities? The law of
the state where the allegedly infringing AI company is based or is
operating? Or the law of the place where individuals’ personal infor­
mation is being used? Or some other country’s law? Can anyone create
chatbots and avatars representing celebrities’ and influencers’ person­
alities and use the likeness to offer certain commercial products (e.g., a
virtual representation of a notorious figure who acts as my shopping
assistant)?17 Furthermore, there seems to be no legal framework that
would govern the interaction between multiple AI systems and agents

3
See, eg, ‘David Guetta plays Eminem’s “Lose Yourself”’ (Southpawers, 5
February 2023) <https://southpawers.com/2023/02/05/david-guetta-emine
m-ai/> accessed 12 February 2023.
4
Southpawers, ‘MDL Beast Fest 2019’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=BTA6LmwhNYk&t = 2s> accessed 12 February 2023.
5
Sam Roche, ‘David Guetta: “If you have terrible taste, your music is still
gonna be terrible, even with AI”’ (MusicTech, 24 July 2023) <https://musictech
.com/news/david-guetta-on-ai/> accessed 30 August 2023.
6
‘David Guetta says the future of music is in AI’ (BBC, 13 February 2023)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-64624525> accessed 30
August 2023.
7
See eg, Franklin Graves, ‘Accelerated Innovation: In Less Than a Year,
We’ve Seen a Decade’s Worth of AI and IP Developments’ (IP Watchdog, 13
August 2023) <https://ipwatchdog.com/2023/08/13/accelerated-innovation
-less-year-weve-seen-decades-worth-ai-ip-developments/id=164842/>
accessed 29 August 2023; ‘Secretary-General Urges Security Council to Ensure
Transparency, Accountability, Oversight, in First Debate on Artificial Intelli­
gence’ (United Nations, 18 July 2023) <https://press.un.org/en/2023/sgsm2
1880.doc.htm> accessed 30 August 2023; Gideon Lichfield & Lauren Goode,
‘The World Isn’t Ready for the Next Decade of AI’ (Wired, 16 August 2023)
<https://www.wired.com/story/have-a-nice-future-podcast-18/> accessed 30
August 2023; Colleen Walsh, ‘How to think about AI: Delving into the legal and
ethical challenges of a game-changing technology’ (Harvard Law Bulletin,
Summer
2023)
<https://hls.harvard.edu/today/how-to-think-about-ai/>
accessed 29 August 2023.
8
The Future of Life Institute, ‘Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter’
<https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/> accessed
29 August 2023; Mustafa Suleyman a& Michael Bhaskar, The Coming Wave
(Crown 2023); Ben Tarnoff, ‘Weizenbaum’s nightmares: how the inventor of the
first chatbot turned against AI’ (The Guardian, 25 July 2023) <https://www.th
eguardian.com/technology/2023/jul/25/joseph-weizenbaum-inventor-eliza-ch
atbot-turned-against-artificial-intelligence-ai?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
accessed 29 August 2023.
9
Sam Altman: ‘The reason people love this stuff [AI] is because it’s providing
real utility. And that doesn’t come along too often.’ See ‘A conversation with
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman’ (YouTube, 18 May 2023) <https://www.youtube.
com/clip/UgkxNvSNAau93YdpBGWEe9rUGyhajFfi9jsb> accessed 30 August
2023. It is expected that by the end of 2023, there will be appr. 12,000 startups
working on AI projects. see For an updated list of such AI solutions, see:
<https://theresanaiforthat.com/> accessed 30 August 2023. David G Widder,
Sarah West & Meredith Whittaker, ‘Open (For Business): Big Tech, Concen­
trated Power, and the Political Economy of Open AI’(2023) <https://papers.ss
rn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4543807> accessed 30 August 2023.

10
‘AI is setting off a great scramble for data’ (Economist, 13 August 2023)
<https://www.economist.com/business/2023/08/13/ai-is-setting-off-a-great-s
cramble-for-data> accessed 29 August 2023.
11
Mark A Lemley & Bryan Case, ‘Fair Learning’ (2021) 99 Tex L Rev 743
12
Sharon Goldman, ‘Generative AI datasets could face a reckoning’ (Venture
Beat, 21 August 2023) <https://venturebeat.com/ai/generative-ai-datasets-c
ould-face-a-reckoning-the-ai-beat/> accessed 29 August 2023.
13
See Kali Hays, ‘OpenAI now tries to hide that ChatGPT was trained on
copyrighted books, including J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series’ (Business In­
sider, 15 August 2023) <https://www.businessinsider.com/openais-latest-ch
atgpt-version-hides-training-on-copyrighted-material-2023-8>
29
August
2023; Winston Cho, ‘Scraping or Stealing? A Legal Reckoning Over AI Looms’
(Hollywood Reporter, 22 August 2023) <https://www-hollywoodreporter-com.
cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/business-new
s/ai-scraping-stealing-copyright-law-1235571501/amp/> accessed 29 August
2023.
14
Lemley & Case, supra n 11, 748; Peter Henderson, Xuechen Li, Dan
Jurafsky, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Mark A. Lemley, Percy Liang, ‘Foundation
Models and Fair Use’ (2023) <https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15715> accessed 30
August 2023.
15
Martin Senftleben, ‘Generative AI and Author Remuneration’ <https
://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4478370>
accessed
30
August 2023; Miranda Nazzaro, ‘Diller confirms plans for legal action over AI
publishing’ (The Hill, 16 JUly 2023) <https://thehill.com/policy/technolog
y/4100533-diller-confirms-plans-for-legal-action-over-ai-publishing/>
accessed 30 August 2023.
16
Will Oremus, ‘Meet the hackers who are trying to make AI go rogue’
(Washington Post, 8 August 2023) <https://www.washingtonpost.com/tech
nology/2023/08/08/ai-red-team-defcon/> accessed 30 August 2023; ICO,
‘Joint statement on data scraping and data protection’ <https://ico.org.
uk/about-the-ico/media-centre/news-and-blogs/2023/08/joint-statement-on-d
ata-scraping-and-data-protection/> accessed 30 August 2023.
17
See <https://goshopwith.ai/chat> accessed 30 August 2023.

2

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

with one another or third parties.18
The third area of legal uncertainty pertains to the large language
models themselves. Different stakeholders have called for greater
transparency in understanding what data is used to train large language
models, and the core technology takes on the character of a “black
box.”19 Much work from a technological, legal, and ethical perspective
needs to be done to get a better insight into how LLMs work and what
oversight mechanisms need to be in place.20
Finally, greater legal certainty is desirable with regard to the legality
of outputs generated by individuals utilizing generative AI tools. Do
such works created with generative AI tools meet the originality con­
dition for the protection of works under copyrightlaw?21 Who has what
rights to outputs generated with generative AI tools?22 In practice,
having (any) rights to the output generated with the help of AI tools is a
huge problem that will determine whether such works can be
commercialized. At the time of writing, one of the main reasons for
delays in the adoption of generative AI technologies by Fortune 1000
companies is uncertainty whether the outputs of machine learning
models are infringing or not.23 Then, there are questions about the
relationship between the training data and the outputs.24 Should the
attribution of the rights to the output generated by an artist depend on
what data was used to train the underlying model? Could output results
be considered to be “derivative works” (from a copyright law perspec­
tive) of the training data?25 If so, then there may be massive restrictions
on how those outputs might be used.

In this paper, we suggest that the Guetta example constitutes a
typical creative use case of generative AI in a contemporary context.
Such generative AI increasingly finds applications across every domain
of the creative industries.26 From composing music, drafting text,
writing software code and other technical documents rendering a room
with a particular design or filled with a specific style of furniture27 –
generative AI permeates every area of creative work and defines digital
culture, more generally.
Judging by the initial reaction to recent developments in generative
AI, the initial response seemed to be, at best, one of anxiety and, at
worst, outright horror.28 There are widespread concerns that these
trends will result in machines taking over many aspects of work or
worries about the capacity of the existing regulatory framework to deal
with these unprecedented creative forms.29 These developments
certainly raise some interesting and important legal and philosophical
questions about the meaning of creativity and the value of works created
by individuals using generative AI tools. Are such works genuinely
creative and original? What – if anything – is their value to society? How
can we determine if such creations should be protected as creative works
under copyright law? If so, how much protection should be afforded to
such works created using generative AI tools? And, more dramatically,
does this mark a new phase in human history, and will AI tools soon
replace (or, in the doomsday account, eliminate) humans?30
Our intention here is to clarify one point about the degree and
character of human involvement and the legal implications of that
involvement. Firstly, and most obviously, it is essential to acknowledge
that there is no such thing as a purely AI-generated work,31 in the sense
that some degree of prompting, refinement, and approval is required.
Equally, some works with minimal human prompting are not of high
value; therefore, copyright should be thin.32 However, this recognition
of the human/author in the loop has important implications. Most
obviously, it chimes with the enterprise discourse around such products

18
Joon Sung Park, et al, ‘Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human
Behavior’ (2023) <https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442> accessed 30 August
2023; Quingyun Yu, et al., ‘AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via
Multi-Agent Conversation Framework’ <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.08155.
pdf> accessed 30 August 2023; Aneesh Tickoo, ‘Google DeepMind and the
University of Tokyo Researchers Introduce WebAgent: An LLM-Driven Agent
that can Complete the Tasks on Real Websites Following Natural Language
Instructions’ (Markettechpost, 29 July 2023) <https://rb.gy/qs5cv> accessed
30 August 2023; in August 2023, Andreesen Horowitz launched “AI-town”, a JS
starter kit for customizing your own “AI simulation” where AI characters live,
chat and socialize: <https://github.com/a16z-infra/AI-town> accessed 30
August 2023.
19
Carol Mullin Hayes, ‘Generative Artificial Intelligence and Copyright: Both
Sides of the Black Box’ <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstrac
t_id=4517799> accessed 30 August 2023.
20
‘Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Actions to Promote Respon­
sible AI Innovation that Protects Americans’ Rights and Safety’ <https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/05/04/fact-sheet-bi
den-harris-administration-announces-new-actions-to-promote-responsibleai-innovation-that-protects-americans-rights-and-safety/> accessed 30 August
2023.
21
Vincenzo Iaia, ‘To Be, or Not to Be … Original Under Copyright Law, That Is
(One of) the Main Questions Concerning AI-Produced Works’ (2022) 71 GRUR
Int 793.
22
See e.g., Dan L Burk, ‘Thirty-Six Views of Copyright Authorship, by Jackson
Pollock’ (2020) 58 Hous L Rev 263, 266; Ryan Benjamin & Elizabeth Rothman,
‘Disrupting Creativity: Copyright Law in the Age of Generative Artificial Intel­
ligence’ Fla L Rev (forthcoming) <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=4185327> accessed 29 August 2023; See e.g., David Newhoff, ‘AI
Machine Learning: Remedies Other Than Copyright Law?’ <https://illu
sionofmore.com/ai-machine-learning-remedies-other-than-copyright-law/>
accessed 30 August 2023.
23
Paulius Jurcys, ‘Event Recap: Augmenting Consumer Experiences in the Age
of Data & AI’ <https://www.prifina.com/blog/event-recap-augmenting-cons
umer-experiences-in-the-age-of-data-ai> accessed 29 August 2023.
24
See eg, Matt Growcoot, ‘Stability AI Boss Admits to Using ‘Billions’ of Im­
ages Without Consent’ (Petapixel, 13 July 2023) <https://petapixel.com/2023/
07/13/stability-ai-boss-admits-to-using-billions-of-images-without-consent/>
accessed 29 August 2023.
25
Daniel J Gervais, ‘AI Derivatives: the Application to the Derivative Work
Right to Literary and Artistic Productions of AI Machines’ (2002) 53 Seton Hall
L Rev 1.

26
For a general overview see Sonya Huang, Pat Grady and GPT-3, ‘Generative
AI: A Creative New World’ <https://www.sequoiacap.com/article/generati
ve-ai-a-creative-new-world/> (Sequoia, 19 September 2022) accessed 12
February 2023; for the investment landscape, see ‘The state of generative AI in
7 charts’ (CB Insights, 25 January 2023) <https://www.cbinsights.com/resea
rch/generative-ai-funding-top-startups-investors/> accessed 12 February 2023.
27
See eg, <https://interiorai.com/> accessed 12 February 2023; Mark WIl­
son, ‘OpenAI’s first acquisition is an AI design company’ (Fast Company, 17
August 2023) <https://www.fastcompany.com/90940634/openais-first-ac
quisition-is-an-ai-design-company> accessed 29 August 2023.
28
‘Expert AI as a Healthcare Superpower’ (A16z Podcast, 10 January 2023)
<https://rb.gy/lcayeo> accessed 12 February 2023; Gerard Baker, ‘Is There
Anything ChatGPT’s AI ‘Kant’ Do?’ (The Wall Street Journal, 13 February 2022)
<https://rb.gy/hlbqpx> accessed 12 February 2023; Hugh Stephens, ‘AI and
Computer-Generated Art: Its Impact on Artists and Copyright’ (Hugh Stephens
Blog, 25 October 2022), <https://rb.gy/srndpb> accessed 12 February 2023;
Stephen L Carter, ‘Can ChatGPT Write a Better Novel Than I Can? (Bloomberg,
11 February 2023) <https://rb.gy/pnbrvx> accessed 13 February 2023.
29
See e.g., Andy Kessler, ‘AI’s Growing Legal Troubles’ (The Wall Street
Journal, 30 July 2023) <https://www.wsj.com/articles/ais-growing-legal-trou
bles-section-230-publisher-class-action-9efaf374> accessed 29 August 2023.
30
See eg, Allison Whitten, ‘Me, Myself, and AI’ (Stanford Magazine, July 2023)
<https://stanfordmag.org/contents/me-myself-and-ai?sf179987774=1>
accessed 29 August 2023; Shana Lynch, ‘Will Generative AI Make You More
Productive at Work? Yes, But Only If You’re Not Already Great at Your Job’
<https://stanfordmag.org/contents/me-myself-and-ai?sf179987774=1>
accessed 29 August 2023.
31
See eg, Emmanuel Salami, ‘AI-Generated Works and Copyright Law: To­
wards a Union of Strange Bedfellows’ (2020) 16 J Intell Prop L & Prac 124.
32
Here, it is important to note the concept coined by Rochelle C Dreyfuss, “if
value then right” in her seminal article ‘Expressive Genericity: Trademarks as
Language in the Pepsi Generation’ (1990) 65 Notre Dame L Rev 397, 405; for
the applicability of this idea to works created with generative AI tools, see
Lemley, supra n 61, 12-13.

3

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

and systems, which frequently uses terms like co-piloting, co-creation,
or companions to capture this dynamic element of prompting, editing,
remixing, and approval in creating a final output.
In thinking about the legal implications of this recognition of the
human/author in the loop, we focus on one aspect of this issue, namely
the meaning of “originality” in a copyright law context and the capacity
of this concept as manifested in US federal law to accommodate the
Guetta case and generative AI. Originality is a concept frequently
referred to when talking about copyright, as it provides an important
means to differentiate works considered socially valuable and worthy of
copyright protection from those that lack this quality of originality. To
be clear, it is not our intention to defend the status quo but merely to
clarify the scope of copyright protections under contemporary condi­
tions, focusing on US federal copyright law.
We limit our current analysis to US federal copyright law for three
reasons: First, the United States (and the State of California in particular)
is the place where most of the leading generative AI companies are
headquartered.33 Second, the United States is the main source of venture
capital investments pouring into companies building AI technologies.34
Finally, the fact that all of the major copyright lawsuits concerning
generative AI are filed before US courts warrants the focus of this paper
on the US copyright framework.35
In this paper, we focus on the originality requirement; other issues –
e.g., the legality of using publicly available data to train large language
models, whether and how fair use might factor into this discussion36 –
are only briefly addressed in Section 5, which deals with broader issues
that surround the debate on the issue of originality. Our reason for
narrowing the scope and focusing on originality is motivated by our
observation of several misconceptions about the degree of human
involvement in the creative process where AI tools are used and how this
issue is approached in the increasingly heated public debates.
For this reason, we begin our analysis in Section 2 by characterising
the creative process when artists like David Guetta rely on generative AI
tools in their creative processes. We offer a comparative illustration by
contrasting these AI tools with a more traditional form of creation, such
as painting a picture or writing a novel. This will highlight some of the
distinctive features of creation in an age of generative AI. The question
we then pose is whether the creative process with AI tools is any
different from creativity where “traditional” creative tools are involved
and whether this form of creation where generative AI tools are used
represents something new. Our answer is that it does, but we need to be
careful and precise in our characterisation of exactly what constitutes
“newness” in the context of generative AI.
Section 3 turns to a brief discussion of extant copyright law in the
United States. Two foundational distinctions – first, between ideas
(which should remain free and not protected by copyright) and ex­
pressions (which can be subject to copyright protection) and second, the
standard legal requirements of originality as a tool to differentiate works
deserving of copyright protection – are introduced. The concept of
originality will help us better address the “copyrightability” of works

Fig. 1. The creative process in an age of generative AI.

created using generative AI tools. This issue is addressed in Section 4.
Section 5 explores how the human-in-the-loop concept connects with
the broader discussion about the copyrightability of works created by
human authors using generative AI tools and whether the assessment of
originality of such works should include the lawfulness of the use of data
for the training of the underlying large language models. Finally, Sec­
tion 6 concludes.
Finally, we recognise that generative AI raises several other ques­
tions. For example, whether it makes a difference where works are
created by humans or AI, and what are the interests of other participants
in the ecosystem (e.g., an author who is upset that other people use
generative AI tools the create “in the style of” the author), the justifi­
cation of copyright, or the use of copyrighted material in machine
learning models. These questions were not the subject of this paper and
should be explored separately, as they are important.
2. A new model of creativity, or old wine in new bottles?
In the following, we aim to demystify what happens during the
creative process, and we suggest that a “black box” approach that
minimizes human involvement in AI-generated work is inadequate. To
illustrate our point, we will rely on the example of David Guetta intro­
duced at the beginning of this article. We first describe the process that
characterises Guetta’s usage of generative AI. Our suggestion is that his
creative process is typical and a representative use case of generative AI.
In elaborating this account, a contrast is made with a more typical case
of creation, namely, an artist painting a picture. This comparison will
allow a more precise clarification of the distinctiveness of creation in a
world of generative AI and – crucially – a better understanding of the
role of technology and a broader network of actors – legal, as well as
natural persons – in all creation, but especially in a contemporary
context.
Five steps of David Guetta’s usage of technology should be noted (see
Fig. 1).37 Based on some concept of what he wanted to achieve (an
iteration of FR music featuring the lyrics in the style of and the voice of
Eminem); Guetta prompted the AI with a request to create a few lines of
lyrics in the style of Eminem. Then, the AI – a piece of software utilising
machine learning produced by a third party or parties – generated the
requested text material and delivered the results back to Guetta. Another
prompt was similarly used with a different AI system to generate the
voice. Guetta refined the version of the piece by re-prompting, regenerating, editing, compiling, and integrating the results generated by
the two different “AIs” with music creating an output, which – finally –
was deployed in his DJ set.
A premise of the discussion is that this process of conception,
prompting, generation, refining, and deployment characterises the creative

33
42 out of 50 top AI companies are located in the US (35 in California), Ryan
Heath, ‘AI boom’s big winners are all in four states’ <https://www.axios.com/
2023/07/24/ai-goldrush-concentrated-4-states> accessed 29 August 2023.
34
Kyle Wiggers, ‘VCs continue to pour dollars into generative AI’ (TechCrunch,
28 March 2023) <https://techcrunch.com/2023/03/28/generative-ai-venturecapital/> accessed 29 August 2023; Anna Cooban, ‘AI investment is booming.
How much is hype?’ (CNN Business, 23 July 2023) <https://www.cnn.com/202
3/07/23/business/ai-vc-investment-dot-com-bubble/index.html> accessed 29
August 2023.
35
See eg, PM v. OpenAI LP, ND Cal, No 3:23-cv-03199 (complaint filed 28
June 2023); Tremblay v. OpenAI Inc., ND Cal, No 3:23-cv-03223 (complaint
filed 28 June 2023); for up-to-date status of the Github Copilot litigation, see
<https://githubcopilotlitigation.com/> accessed 30 August 2023; Getty Images,
Inc v Stability AI, DC Del., No. 1:23-cv-00135 (complaint filed 3 February 2023)
36
See Lemley & Casey, supra n 11, 743.

37

Other scholars have also tried to visualise the human-machine interactions
in the creative process, see Jane C Ginsburg & Luke A Budiardjo, ‘Authors and
Machines’ (2019) 34 Berkeley Tech L J 343 and P Bernt Hugenholtz and João
Pedro Quintais, ‘Copyright and Artificial Creation: Does EU Copyright Law
Protect AI-Assisted Output?’ (2021) 52 IIC 1190.
4

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

Fig. 2. Mapping creativity in the two use cases.

instruction, i.e., an input of some kind39 (in this case, “Write a verse
in the style of Eminem about the Future Rave).” This instruction was
a self-conscious and deliberative choice on the part of a human
creator aiming to materialise their concept. This second step does
appear to be novel – there is nothing equivalent or comparable in the
artist’s case, even if certain aspects or conditions of prompting –
engaging in some sort of background or preliminary research, for
example – may be part of more traditional modes of creativity.
• Generation. The act of generation, in itself, is obviously not new –
the painter paints, after all – and generating something would seem
to be a necessary condition of all creative activity. Moreover – and
this may be a slightly more contentious observation – the reliance on
technology is not new either. A painter depends on simpler tech­
nology – brushes, paints, and paper – but some technology and by
extension the producers of that technology are implicated in all
creative processes and content generation. In an important sense,
therefore, all creativity is a co-creation of human and machine and
implicates the involvement of third parties. As such, technologies can
be thought of as actors in the creative process, not in the sense that
they take action, but in that they facilitate action and put action in

use of generative AI. There are several aspects of this creative process
that we would emphasise:
• Conception. Guetta started with an idea and knew what he wanted –
Eminem-style lyrics and voices accompanying energetic four-to-thefloor FR – although he did not know, specifically, what he would get
from the AI. He had a vision when he started, but he was not working
with or from a fixed plan or script – i.e., he didn’t know, precisely,
where he was going. This is nothing new – all artists, our painter for
example, presumably start the creative process with a similar vision
or conception, however, minimal of what it is they are trying to
achieve in a particular instantiation of the creative process, even if
they don’t always have a fixed conception of what it is they want to
create.38 In a creative context, intentions are important but
malleable and incomplete and contingent upon context, especially
previous works by dominant figures in the genre and tradition, as
well as related genres and traditions.
• Prompting. Crucially, generative AI is not – for the moment, at least –
acting independently, in the sense that it requires external

39
See comment by Sam Altman at the 2023 Bloomberg Technology Summit:
“[t]here is this sci-fi idea that those [AI] systems can better address themselves,
can discover new architectures, can write new code. I think we are miles away
from that; but it’s worth paying attention to.” ‘OpenAI CEO Sam Altman on the
Future of AI’ available at: <https://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/202306-22/openai-ceo-sam-altman-on-the-future-of-ai> accessed 30 August 2023.

38

See the comments of Davey Whitcraft, who stated that he “use[s] generative
AI tools to experiment push forward the boundaries of human creativity.”
Paulius Jurcys, ‘Creativity in the Age of AI’ (YouTube, 15 May 2023)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qoY19B6MJk> accessed 30 August
2023.
5

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

motion and “make a difference in another agent’s action.”40 In the
context of his work on scientific invention, the French sociologist,
Bruno Latour, talked of the need for a “flat ontology” in which we
don’t artificially over-emphasise the role of human beings in human
activities (such “purification” is what he thought of as the arrogance
of modernity) but rather see creativity as an effect of “networks” of
human and machines. However, what is certainly distinctive in the
Guetta case is the (nearly) complete delegation of the act of gener­
ation to a third party or parties (the generative AI software). The
content that generative AI tools create depends on the prompts
provided by the human author: the human author provides in­
structions and tasks for the generative AI assistant to deliver an
iteration of the ideas that the human author is prompted to explore.
And even though what the AI created or gave back to Guetta in its
unedited form was not simply a copy of anything that already existed
but something genuinely new and unique and that didn’t exist
before, such generated output is molded and shaped by initial
prompts provided by a human author. The generated content is in
some obvious sense new, even if the act of creating the lyrics and the
voice, the AI software relied on enormous quantities of data accu­
mulated, typically, off the Internet. However, it is important to note
that generation happens as a response to the prompting of the human
author, David Guetta, looking to manifest a specific vision.
• Refining. Once he received the generated content, Guetta edited the
received content and integrated it with some music. In this respect,
refining is not simply the editing of a human-created text/picture (i.
e., part of a process generation) but a distinctive stage of working
with something given back to the creator by the third-party gener­
ative AI. In this respect, it does differ from our artist. Refining, in the
sense used here, includes a broad spectrum of activities ranging from
a crude copy-pasting (e.g., a lazy, dishonest student using ChatGPT
to “write” their report) to a more sophisticated bundle of processes,
including curation, collation, compilation, and assemblage. It also
may involve re-visiting the prompting and generation stages, and the
simple sequential model introduced above may become a more dynamic,
cyclical, and iterative process of ongoing prompting, generating, and
filtering. We don’t know exactly, based on the Instagram post, how
this worked in the Guetta case, i.e., whether he relied on the first
versions produced by the AI, but the general point about the possi­
bility and centrality of refining still stands. And this seems particu­
larly relevant in the context of recent generative AI (ChatGPT, for
instance) where the AI remembers the context from an earlier phase
of the interaction. This is a recent feature and might be thought of as
refining-by-design, i.e., refining is a core feature built into the
operation of the technology that allows the AI to improve its per­
formance over time based on a process of iteration and learning.41 The
final, approved result of refining is what we would call output. Think
of it as the created piece of music in the Guetta case.
• Deployment. When, where, and how the output material is used is
subject to a high degree of external (i.e., human) influence. The
generative AI, for the moment, cannot determine when, where, and
how its creations will be used. This points to a more general feature
of the current state of this technology, namely that it has no under­
standing of what it is creating or doing and lacks the quality of selfconsciousness or individual autonomy. Again, however, the act of
deployment is nothing new, and creators – including our artist – have
always exerted some degree of autonomous control over whether
and how their works are first published, disseminated, and used,
even if that control was never total (intermediaries, such as critics

and galleries in the case of painting, play a crucial role, for instance)
and non-sanctioned uses frequently occur, hence the need for IP
protection.
The results of the comparison are illustrated in Fig. 2. The different
actors and technologies that they utilise are added. Think of these two
graphics as illustrations of the network of “actors” – understood in the
broad sense of human, corporate and machine actors – that constitute a
creative work in any given case.
What becomes clear from the above is that the sophistication of the
technologies and the network of actors (human, corporate and machine)
is broader and more complex in the case of David Guetta. The degree of
involvement of third parties in the generative moment (the AI software
developer and the data they rely on) does, therefore, seem different from
the painting example. We can question whether the creator has the same
role in the creative process. But again, this appears to be a question of
degree rather than a qualitative difference. All of this is simply to say
that modern Romantic notions of creativity as purely human-generated
involving creation ex nihilo need to be replaced by a vision of creativity
as the multi-staged effects of complex networks of human, corporate,
and machine (both software and hardware) “actors.” The Romantic
fiction of the lone genius creator is a fantasy that retroactively obscures
the cultural and technological tradition implicated in all creative works.
And this observation is certainly not meant to denigrate the role of
creators as they play an essential role in driving a tradition forward in
new and unexpected ways through their novel use of technology and reimagining of tradition. Rather, our point is to suggest that the imposition
of constraints upon such creative re-imagining of a tradition and use of
technology should be minimised and only introduced when there is a
compelling justification.
3. Assessing originality in modern US copyright law
Having described the model of creativity in the Guetta case, we now
turn to copyright. This section briefly introduces the two requirements
that form the basis of the “originality” test in modern copyright law, at
least in a US context. We start with the fundamental idea/expression
distinction (Section 3.1.) and then explore how the US courts have
interpreted the twin elements of the “originality” test (Section 3.2.).
Section 4 then analyses the originality of Guetta’s composition as
characterised in Section 2 above using this framework.
3.1. A tangible medium of expression
One of the foundational principles of modern copyright law is that
ideas are not protected by copyright law and that only expressions can
be copyrighted. In the US, for example, the Copyright Act provides that
copyright protection does not extend “to any idea, procedure, process,
system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery.”42 In
other words, ideas and facts are not protected by copyright law; only the
way in which an author expresses ideas or facts can be protected.43 This
decision that ideas receive no protection, which is now codified in
Federal Law, was settled in the 1879 case, Baker v. Selden. The plaintiff’s
book describing a method of accounting was not protected, because “[w]
here the truths of a science or the methods of an art are the common
property of the whole world, any author has the right to express the one,
or explain and use the other, in his own way” (our emphasis).44
There are three main reasons for this. The first is pragmatic and
evidential: How can we establish who had what ideas when? Without any

40

42

Bruno Latour, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network
Theory (OUP 2005) 72.
41
See Ari Seff, ‘How ChatGPT is Trained’ (YouTube, 25 January 2023)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VPRSBzXzavo> accessed 13 February
2023.

17 US Code § 102(b). See also Pamela Samuelson, ‘Why Copyright Law
Excludes Systems and Processes from the Scope of Its Protection’ (2007) 85 Tex
L Rev 1921.
43
Nichols v Universal Pictures Corp, 45 F2d 119 (2d Cir 1930).
44
Baker v Selden, 101 US 99 (1879).
6

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

tangible evidence expressed in tangible form (e.g., paint, paper, vinyl), it
is impossible to say that Person A had the idea independently from
Person B.45 This means that if there is a dispute between people accusing
each other of stealing each other’s ideas, it is practically impossible to
determine the fact of copying without any tangible evidence, i.e., the
administrative costs of resolving such disputes are prohibitively high.
Furthermore, the emphasis on the function of the fixation (i.e., that the
can be perceived or retrieved) rather than on form (e.g., on paper, on
canvas, in writing) was to ascertain that the rights of authors are unaf­
fected by the advancements in technology that could not have been
anticipated by the legislator.46
A second reason that ideas do not enjoy copyright protection is the
notion that limiting the use of ideas would have an inhibiting effect on
scientific development and progress. This notion can be found in Article
I Section 8 of the US Constitution, for example.47
A third reason for excluding ideas from copyright protection con­
cerns freedom of speech. In the Eldred case, for example, the United
States Supreme Court suggested that the idea/expression distinction is
necessary to reconcile copyright law with the principle of freedom of
speech embodied in the First Amendment of the Constitution.48

Image 1. . The easter bunny cake52.

publishing telephone directories where Rural accused another company
of copying Rural’s white pages without permission. The Court held that
a “sufficient amount of originality” is required for works eligible for
copyright protection. In applying this test, the Court held that the mere
arrangement of publicly known facts in alphabetical order is not creative
– i.e., anyone could have done it.
So how do we explain the “modest creativity” required for works to
be subject to copyright protection? The Feist case could be a good
starting point to reverse engineer the definition of “originality.” To be
considered as “original,” the work must contain something more than a
mere collection of real-world facts. According to Feist, spending some
time to arrange such facts in some obvious fashion (e.g., writing names
of town residents alphabetically) does not meet the threshold of “modest
creativity”; there must be something more that emanates from a person.
Besides, whether a work is modestly creative is a question of fact in
every single case, and it is for lawyers or judges to decide based on
circumstances of the case at hand. As long as the work is the result of
some creative endeavour by a human being, it will be deemed “modestly
creative” and thus original under the US copyright law.
It should be noted – and emphasised – that the originality threshold
of US copyright law is very low. Basically, according to Feist, anything
that rises above the threshold of facts, formulas, and natural discoveries
and can be attributed to an individual’s creative expression can be
protected by copyright. (This paper does not address the theories that
might expand our understanding of why copyright exists).
Originality does not, therefore, require the author’s intent to be
original.51 How come? Let’s discuss a couple of examples. Imagine you
are trying to bake a cake, but something in the process goes hilariously
wrong. One example could be a failed Easter Bunny case that was
photographed at one of the major US grocery chains Safeway and later
appeared on Cakewrecks.com website (Image 1).
Looking at this photo, we may wonder: Did the creator intend to
make such an odd-looking cake? One presumes not. What if the baker
had an idea or concept of a “perfect” Easter Bunny cake but failed to
materialise her vision? Would this cake still be considered original?
US courts generally agree that the author’s intent to be original is
irrelevant in deciding whether the work should be copyrightable. Instead,
it is important to look at the outcome of the author’s activity. Copyright
protection is available to works that are sufficiently distinguishable
regardless of whether an author tries to create something of her own. The
Easter Bunny cake shown above is unique in its appearance – clearly, it is
one of a kind. Also, very few people would be able to bake such a version of
an Easter Bunny. Thus, it is going to be considered as original. There may be

3.2. The originality test
To be protected under copyright law in the United States, a work also
must be original. The originality of a work is determined by considering
two factors. First, the author must create the work independently. This
means that if two people create an identical work (let’s say they write an
identical verse or draw an identical image of a cat), each of their works can
be protected under copyright even though they are completely identical. As
long as the author creates their works separately, the US courts will
consider it sufficient to meet the requirement of independent creation.49
The second element of originality is that a work must be somewhat
creative. This is also known as the “modest creativity” requirement. The
US Copyright Act clearly states that copyright protection “does not
extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation,
concept, principle, or discovery” (S. 17 USC 102(b)). In other words,
naturally occurring events, real-world facts, and mathematical formulas
are considered matters of the physical world. Therefore, if an author
writes down something that is considered factual, such content will not
be considered original.
Probably the most well-known illustration of the “modest creativity”
test could be drawn from the Feist case decided by the US Supreme Court
in 1991.50 In this case, a dispute arose between two companies
52
Luara Northrup, ‘Safeway Doesn’t Want You Photographing Their Terrible
Cakes For That Blog About Terrible Cakes’ (Consumerist, 13 November 2012).
<https://consumerist.com/2012/11/13/safeway-doesnt-want-you-photo
graphing-their-terrible-cakes-for-that-blog-about-terrible-cakes/> accessed 12
February 2023.
45
Nichols v Universal Pictures Corp, 45 F2d 119, 121 (2d Cir 1930).
46
Dan Hunter, Intellectual Property (OUP 2012) 35.
47
Art I S 8 of the US Constitution provides that the Congress has the power,
“To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited
Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings
and Discoveries.”
48
Eldred v Ashcroft, 537 US 186, 219-220 (2003) (‘[C]opyright law contains
built-in First Amendment accommodations. First, it distinguishes between ideas
and expression and makes only the latter eligible for copyright protection.’);
Golan v Holder, 565 US 302, 329 (2012). Critically, see Neil W Netanel, Copy­
right’s Paradox (2008) 4.
49
“To qualify for copyright protection, a work must be original to the author,”
which means that the work must be “independently created by the author” and
it must possess “at least some minimal degree of creativity.” Feist Publications,
Inc v Rural Telephone Service Company, Inc, 499 US 340 (1991) 345.
50
Feist Publications, Inc v Rural Telephone Service Company, Inc, 499 US 340
(1991).

51
See Compendium of the US Copyright Office Practices (Chapter 300), S
310.5 <https://www.copyright.gov/comp3/chap300/ch300-copyrightable-a
uthorship.pdf> accessed 12 February 2023.

7

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

situations where a work is distinguishable from other similar works
because of the author’s bad eyesight, trembling muscles, or a shock caused
by a clap of thunder. If an author adopts the work as her own, the copyright
protection will, nevertheless, attach.53
How about those works that do not appear appealing to the eye?
Should copyright protect works we may find not pretty, ugly, or even
insulting? In the US and many other countries, copyright practice adopts
a principle of aesthetic neutrality which means that lawyers (i.e., at­
torneys, judges, or government agencies) should not stand in Judgment
as to whether works are beautiful and aesthetically pleasing or not.
Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, after all. The Easter Bunny cake will
be deemed to meet the threshold of minimum creativity, even if most
people find it distasteful or otherwise unattractive.
Finally, originality does not mean that the work must be new. You
can obtain copyright protection even if the work – let’s say a phrase – is
not new. If it is “modestly creative” (and we now know this threshold is
very low), then you can obtain the copyright in the work. The crucial
point here is the distinction of the terminology used when artistic works
are protected by copyright and technological inventions protected under
patent law. An invention can be patented only if the three requirements
of novelty, inventive step and practical utility are satisfied. To determine
whether an invention is new, patent examiners usually check all avail­
able databases and determine whether the invention is new: has anyone
already come up with this idea? Has this type of invention been patented
already? If patent examiners determine that the idea in the patent
application is “new”, then the invention can be protected by a patent
provided that two other requirements are satisfied.
As such, novelty is not required to benefit from copyright protection:
the work must simply be original. If the author creates something
independently, and it is not a literal copy of another work, such work can
be granted protection under copyright law.

be deemed original? Was this work created independently? Does the
composition meet the “minimum creativity” threshold? Should works be
considered original, and thus subject to copyright protection, when
created using generative AI tools such as Midjourney or ChatGPT? Let us
address the elements of originality in turn.
4.1. Independent creation
The question of whether a work is independently created most
frequently arises in copyright disputes where someone is accused of
copying a plaintiff’s work.55 It would then be up to the defendant to
prove that they created the work independently, without having seen or
heard the plaintiff’s work. If we simplify it, their argument would be, “I
created it on my own.” So, in David Guetta’s words, he would argue that
he was sitting alone in his studio and came up with the concept to try
and see what happens when he mixes Eminem’s rap with the AIgenerated music which we would get by adding the prompt “the
future of rave.” It is David Guetta and no one else who came up with the
prompts for the text and music.
One of the essential points of independent creation is that the work
emanates from a human being and that the work is created by a natural
person.56 However, and as emphasised above, people always use some
kinds of tools to achieve their desired results in the real world. Leonardo
da Vinci used a palette to paint the Mona Lisa. The baker of the Easter
Bunny used various ingredients, presumably a spoon, a spatula, and an
oven to (albeit ineffectually) bake the cake. Photographers and graphic
designers use Adobe Photoshop to edit their images. Typically, David
Guetta would use a computer, DAW software, software plugins, turn­
tables, and a collection of vinyl recordings to create music. But this time
he also used generative AI tools (ChatGPT and Uberduck) to create his
remix. That all seems totally normal and unproblematic.
When we talk about generative AI tools in their current phase of
adoption, it should be noted that prompts may need to be modified, clar­
ified, and adjusted many times to get usable and satisfying results. In a
generative AI environment, the content does not emerge from nowhere but
must be initiated by a person who types in a prompt or prompts, and then
possibly spends time improving the results by further modifying the
prompts as part of the process of refining.57 And just like in the baking of
the Easter Bunny cake example, it is up to each individual to choose which
combination of tools and ingredients to use and choose the colour of the
cake, so to speak. David Guetta would appear to have a strong case that the
prompts he used contributed to an “independent creation” and that the
“independent creation” element of the originality test is, therefore, met.
More generally, the question then arises of how the creative process
differs between using conventional tools (e.g., a brush) and generative
AI tools. Intuitively, we might assume that the creator has less control
over the final output when machine learning and data are used to
generate content. But it seems that the question here is more about the
degree of human involvement (as opposed to the input from the tech­
nology) in the creative process rather than any qualitative difference.
Again, a Romantic conception of creative ex nihilo may affect (distort)
our Judgment on this point, as it raises the threshold beyond the
traditional legal standard.
As observed in Section 2, it is important to avoid the over-simplistic
suggestion that with the emergence of generative AI, we are moving

4. The originality of works created with generative AI tools
Much ink has been spilled discussing how AI will change everything.
In the creative and legal domains, there are many discussions about
whether “AI-generated” works should be protected by copyright.54 Here,
we want to make a case that the existing framework, as laid out in
Section 3 is sufficiently durable to handle the mode of creativity
described in Section 2. Considering what we already know about
assessing the originality of works, can the composition of David Guetta
53
Opinion by Judge Jerome Frank in Alfred Bell & Co v Catalda Fine Arts, Inc,
191 F2d 99 (2d Cir 1951).
54
See eg, Yang Xiao, ‘Decoding Authorship, Is There Really no Place for an
Algorithmic Author Under Copyright Law?’ (2023) 54 IIC 5; Michael D Murray,
‘Generative and AI Authored Artworks and Copyright Law’ (2023) 43(1)
Hastings Comm & Ent L J 28; Begona Gonzalez Otero, ‘Machine Learning
Models Under the Copyright Microscope: Is EU Copyright Fit for Purpose?’
(2021) GRUR Int 1043; Yong Wang and Hongxuyang Lu, ‘Copyright protection
for AI-generated outputs: The experience from China’ (2021) 42 CLSR; Jane
Ginsburg, ‘People Not Machines: Authorship and What It Means in the Berne
Convention’ (2018) IIC 131; Giancarlo Frosio, ‘The Artificial Creatives: The Rise
of Combinatorial Creativity from Dall-E to GPT-3’ <https://papers.ssrn.com/s
ol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4350802> accessed 29 August 2023; Ryan
Abbott and Elizabeth Rothman, ‘Disrupting Creativity: Copyright Law in the
Age of Generative Artificial Intelligence’ <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers
.cfm?abstract_id=4185327> accessed 29 August 2023; Jon McCormack et al, ‘Is
Writing Prompts Really Making Art?’ <https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13049>
accessed 23 February 2023; Jane C Ginsburg & Luke A Budiardjo, ‘Authors and
Machines’ (2019) 34 Berkeley Tech L J 343; Vicenç Feliú, ‘Our Brains Beguil’d:
Copyright Protection for AI Created Works’ (2021) USF Intell Prop & Tech L J
105; Carys Craig and Ian Kerr, ‘The Death of the AI Author’ (2021) OLR 35;
Daniel J Gervais, ‘The Protection Under International Copyright Law of Works
Created with or by Computers’ (1991) IIC 628; Pamela Samuelson, ‘The Future
of Software Protection: Allocating Ownership Rights in Computer-Generated
Works’ (1986) 47 U Pitt L Rev 1185.

55
This issue of independent creation is conceptualised as an affirmative
defence, see Feist, 499 US 340 (1991) 345-46.
56
Alfred Bell & Co v Catalda Fine Arts, Inc, 191 F2d 99, 102 (2d Cir 1951)
(“‘Original’ in reference to a copyrighted work means that the particular work
‘owes its origin’ to the ‘author.’”)
57
See comments by Davey Whitcraft who noted that creating truly amazing
works with generative AI tools requires much time (weeks, or months), Paulius
Jurcys, ‘Creativity in the Age of AI’ (YouTube, 15 May 2023) <https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=9qoY19B6MJk> acccessed 30 August 2023.

8

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

from a world of human-driven creation to a world of machine-driven
creation. Instead, our suggestion is that creation has always been the
product of human-machine hybrid forms of collaborative creation –
what we might characterise as a co-creation of a human author or authors
(in a case where there are multiple creators) and technology – and that
generative AI is merely the latest and most sophisticated iteration of
such a trend. Moreover, as highlighted in Section 2, multiple third
parties are implicated in any creative act in a contemporary context
where a wide and diverse range of companies produce the technologies
that are utilised by creators. The number and degree of involvement of
third-party actors involved is much greater in the Guetta case, for
example.
This point is particularly pertinent in the context of generative AI.
Machine learning and generative AI software of the kind used by David
Guetta relies on enormous quantities of data accumulated, typically, off
the Internet and which the third-party AI developer oftentimes does not
have any clear or obvious right to use. Certainly, they do not have the
permission of the original creators or owners of such data. Nevertheless,
generative AI completely depends on this dataset to produce anything of
value.58 However, as we further elaborate in Section 5.2., the determi­
nation of independent creation should not depend on the question of
whether the third-party developer of generative AI tools has used the
training data lawfully.

What do these principles covered by the “modest creativity” element
suggest in our analysis of the clip created by David Guetta with gener­
ative AI tools? If the author’s intentions do not matter, it probably means
that we do not need to analyse whether Guetta’s prompts were original
or creative; rather, we would probably need to focus on the question of
whether the final work meets this threshold of “minimum creativity.”
We would posit that the “Future Rave with Eminem” piece created by
Guetta clearly rises above a mere compilation of facts (the telephone
directory of Feist). Regardless of what Guetta had in mind or what his
intentions were when he started out, the output clearly and obviously
meets the threshold of being “somewhat creative.”
What about the fact that Guetta did not know what the result would
be at the concept stage of the creative process? Does this matter in
assessing originality? As highlighted with our Easter Bunny Cake
example, unexpectedly created works – be they successful and appealing
to the eye, or a disastrous blunder – can still be protected by copyright.
Following this line of reasoning, the fact that we cannot fully predict ex
ante what results the generative AI might deliver does not matter in
making a final assessment as to whether the work is “modestly creative”
or not.
One might also argue that such works are modestly creative because
they are created using tools that have not existed before. The second
element of the originality test means that the work merely possesses
some minimum level of creativity. What David Guetta has created using
generative AI tools is a piece of music that did not exist before. He
devised an original concept to combine Eminem’s voice with FR rave
music and reimagined what the future rave might look like. Yes, indeed,
he used AI tools to materialise his vision, but it was his idea to create this
kind of mix. He also used those AI tools himself and refined the results to
create a unique output that he deployed in his show. A new concept. An
iterative process of creation. New content, new beats, and the crowd
loved it!

4.2. Modest creativity
The element of “modest creativity” in determining the originality of a
work raises more intricate questions. How can we apply “modest crea­
tivity” in a generative AI context? At which point in the creative process
should we assess whether the “modest creativity” test is met? Should the
prompt itself be original, or should we look at the final version of the
work created using “generative AI” tools (what we characterised as the
output in Section 2)? It is not our intention to suggest that these can be
easily answered in all cases – and we would accept the Guetta case is a
relatively simple one. Moreover, harder cases may involve difficult
judgments about whether to offer protection at all or the form of pro­
tection and its amount. Nevertheless, courts are routinely confronted
with difficult and delicate questions of this kind, and we would
cautiously suggest that expert courts in concrete cases are well or, at
least, best placed to answer such questions.59 And even if the courts get
these decisions wrong from time to time, such a system seems preferable
to the imposition of a crude rule that limits the use of technologies and
stifles opportunities for creativity.
In Feist, for example, the US Supreme Court held that to benefit from
copyright protection, works have to rise above being mere facts of the
physical world. But as we discussed before, the threshold of “modest
creativity” is very low, at least under the US copyright law. Furthermore,
in assessing what is “modestly creative,” US courts only analyse the
outcome of the creative process, or the actual expression, that a person
came up with (not the author’s intention).

5. Copyright re-visited
When it comes to creative works, isn’t it always the case that artists
try to create something that gains the attention of a mass audience and
generates media interest? Writers dream of landing publishing contracts
with major publishers and making it to the New York Times bestseller
list. Visual artists aspire to create the next Mona Lisa. It is natural that
machine learning and generative AI tools make everyone excited
because they expand and share this feeling of being capable of creating
something unique and beautiful. And, from that perspective, don’t all
artists always aspire to create something truly original?
One of the key advantages of generative AI is that it accelerates the
process of creativity: rather than spending time in front of an empty
sheet of paper, we can now prompt AI to provide us with some initial
ideas and possible suggestions that provide impetus to the process of
creating.60 From that perspective, generative AI tools are appealing to
people working in creative industries. For individual users businesses,
generative helps save time and curtail the costs of production.61 People
who are worried that AI tools will replace humans should, perhaps,
worry less and learn how to use those tools to increase their own pro­
ductivity.62 Even if we don’t completely rely on such tools, they stim­
ulate creativity and – when combined with a process of refining – they
are opening new opportunities and possibilities.

58
For a discussion, see Jenny Quang, ‘Does Training AI Violate Copyright
Law?’ (2021) 36 Berkeley Tech L J 1401. Watermarking has been explored as a
possible solution to prevent copyright violations by ML models, see eg, Sofiane
Lounici, ‘Protect your machine learning models with watermarking’ (SAP, 8
November 2021) <https://blogs.sap.com/2021/11/08/protect-your-machine
-learning-models-with-watermarking/> accessed 23 February 2023 and ‘Pro­
tecting the Intellectual Property of AI with Watermarking’ (IBM, 20 July 2018)
<https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2018/07/ai-watermarking/>
accessed 23 February 2023.
59
Richard Lawler, ‘The US Copyright Office says you can’t copyright Mid­
journey AI-generated images’ (The Verge, 23 February 2023) <https://www.the
verge.com/2023/2/22/23611278/midjourney-ai-copyright-office-kristina-k
ashtanova> accessed 23 February 2023. For a critical analysis see also Van
Lindberg, ‘A mixed decision from the US Copyright Office’ (Process Mechanics,
22 February 2023).

60

Reid Hoffman, Impromptu: Amplifying Our Humanity Through AI (Dallepedia
2023) 18.
61
Ibid 110; Mark A Lemley, ‘How Generative AI Turns Copyright Upside
Down’
(2023)
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstrac
t_id=4517702>, accessed 29 August 2023 who discusses the concept of
“cheap creativity.”
62
See Hoffman, supra n 60, 49-50, who makes a comparison between creating
in the style of John Lennon, and asking how would John Lennon use this tool.
9

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

to warrant such a historic introduction of disclosure requirements.66
Second, it may be questioned whether such disclosure requirements are
in line with the no formalities principle adopted in Article 5(2) Berne
Convention.67 Finally, not only contemporary copyright law is not well
designed to support a prompt-based system,68 it also seems like a
dangerous trend that misconceives the character of the creative process
in the case of generative AI.
In mass media publications, it is easy to catch the attention of wide
audiences with such and bold statements that certain legal institutions
do not meet the test of time and that technology moves faster than the
law. But this has always been the case, and laws and social norms are
constantly adjusted to meet the test of rapidly evolving technologies.
With regard to the issue of originality in copyright, we would pro­
pose a more modest approach against the quick and easy dismissal of
legal concepts that have evolved and stood the test of time. Looking back
at history, technology has always preceded the existing copyright laws
(think of the printing machine, the invention of cars, VCRs, live audio,
and video streaming).69 And, as we hopefully demonstrated here, the
two elements of originality developed by courts in solving real cases
prove to be helpful in approaching David Guetta’s music composition.
We would modestly suggest that they might also be helpful in other
cases where similar questions arise. We would concede that drawing a
bright line is hard and that – as mentioned already – it will require
difficult and delicate decisions. Nevertheless, this is preferable to the
alternative – denying protection completely – which risks throwing the
baby out with the bath water and placing the artists at the cutting edge
of creativity in a weak position.
And finally, the David Guetta story reveals something more general
about creativity in the digital age. Earlier – and influential – models of
creativity as purely human-driven and involving creation ex nihilo do
become harder to sustain in a new age of generative AI. The creator –
understood as an abstract or pure will operating independently of any
technology has always been a fantasy and never existed. Creation has
always been over-determined by a collaborative combination of humans
and machines. We need to be more attuned both to hybridity and the role
of the nonhuman in the constitution of creativity. Hybrid-networked (i.
e., human – corporate – machine) creators have always created hybrid –
networked cultural forms (i.e., creations that blend human and
technology-constituted elements). But – we would suggest – this hy­
bridity becomes increasingly visible and complex in the context of a
world of generative AI. Crucially, however, as we have suggested here,
this does not mean copyright or notions of originality are redundant or
copyright is unable to accommodate Guetta and other similar cases.
Quite the contrary, notions of originality provide a robust framework for
managing new technologies and the new forms of creativity that such
technologies facilitate.

5.1. Identifying the human author-in-the-loop
Against this emerging background, what we might label “AI literacy”
becomes vital. There is no turning back, and our society must find ways
to cultivate the ability to work with these technologies in a responsible
and effective manner. In order to better understand how to adjust the
existing legal frameworks to the world where generative AI technologies
are ubiquitous, it is important to understand in what ways those new AI
tools change the well-known creative process that copyright law aims to
incentivize and reward. In light of what we discussed about the creative
process where human authors use generative AI tools in Section 2 above,
we believe that in most cases, it is not very difficult to identify at which
stages of the creative process a human author is involved.
We also see how the unpacked notion of the creative process, which
we described in Section 2, provides a clear response to those who have
been questioning whether the notions of independent creation and
modest creativity are of any use in the age of generative AI. In the
copyright law literature, the idea of doing away with the requirement of
independent creation is not entirely new,63 and it seems to emerge again
in the context of generative AI. As explained previously, one of the key
functions of the “independent creation” requirement is to identify that
there was a human being who came up with an idea and created
something that is fixed in tangible form. Hence, we are of the opinion
that the notion “AI-generated” work is inaccurate and leads to confu­
sion; it is misleading because, as we showed in Section 2, there is always
a human/author in the loop, also in those cases when creators utilize
generative AI tools.
Curiously, the US Copyright Office has adopted a more cautious
approach on this point requiring artists to disclose which parts of a work
have been created using generative AI tools.64 Pursuant to this “promptbased approach”, the US Copyright Office ignores the creativity
contributed by the AI system and focuses on rewarding creativity
contributed by human creators, provided that human authors are able to
show how the series of prompts rise to meet the threshold of minimum
creativity.65
Although such an approach could be considered as a practical step
forward, it could be criticised from at least three possible angles. First,
until now, artists have never been required to disclose the tools used in
the creative process in copyright application forms in the US, but a view
seems to be gaining traction that now might be the time to reverse this
and adopt new requirements. One can argue whether generative AI is all
that different from other digital creation tools such as Adobe Photoshop

63
Christopher Buccafusco, ‘There’s No Such Thing as Independent Creation,
and it’s a Good Thing, Too’ (2023) 64 Wm & Mary L Rev 1617.
64
See Copyright Office Statement of Policy, 88 Fed Reg 16192 (16 March
2023)
<https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2023-03-16/pdf/202305321.pdf> accessed 29 August 2023: “In the case of works containing AIgenerated material, the Office will consider whether the AI contributions are
the result of ‘mechanical reproduction’ or instead of an author’s ‘own original
mental conception, to which [the author] gave visible form.’ The answer will
depend on the circumstances, particularly how the AI tool operates and how it
was used to create the final work.” For a critical account, see Van Lindberg, ’A
mixed decision from the US Copyright Office’ (Process Mechanics, 22 February
2023) <https://processmechanics.com/2023/02/22/a-mixed-decision-fromthe-us-copyright-office/> accessed 5 October 2023).
65
There is at least one lower court decision in the District court of Washington
DC which seems to have followed this approach. See Stephen Thaler v Shira
Perlmutter, Case 1:22-cv-01564-BAH; Riddhi Sethi & Isaiah Poritz, ‘AI-Gener­
ated Art Lacks Copyright Protection, D.C. Court Says (1)’ (Bloomberg Law, 18
August 2023) <https://news.bloomberglaw.com/ip-law/ai-generated-art-lac
ks-copyright-protection-d-c-court-rules> acccessed 30 August 2023; Heather
Whitney, ‘Court Says No Human Author, No Copyright (but Human Authorship
of GenAI Outputs Remains Uncertain)’ (Technology & Marketing Law Blog, 22
August 2023) <https://rb.gy/7hmaz> acccessed 30 August 2023.

5.2. Does the lawfulness of training data affect originality?
An important complicating factor in the case of generative AI is the
direct dependence of the AI systems on aggregated data used to train the
66
See comments by Katrina M Kershner, Paulius Jurcys, ‘Creativity in the Age
of AI’ (YouTube, 15 May 2023) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9q
oY19B6MJk> accessed 30 August 2023.
67
Article 5(2) of the Berne Convention states, “[t]he enjoyment and the ex­
ercise of [the copyright owner’s] rights shall not be subject to any formality.”
For a broader discussion, see Jane C Ginsburg, ‘Berne Forbidden Formalities
and Mass Digitisation’ (2016) 96 B U L Rev 745; David R. Carducci, ‘Copyright
Registration: Why the U.S. Should Berne the Registration Requirement ’ (2020)
33 Ga St U L 873.
68
Lemley, supra n 61.
69
See e.g., Mark Rose, Authors in Court: Scenes from the Theater of Copyright
(Harvard Univesity Press, 2016). For an overview of how technologies and
underlying business models have affected the music industry, see Allen Bag­
frede & Cecily Mak, Music Law in the Digital Age (Berklee Press 2009).

10

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

whether generative AI models are used in a corporate environment by
employees in enterprises. It is easy to envisage several different sce­
narios involving business, which require further discussion. For
example, where enterprises train their own models based on the com­
pany’s own data (for example, an architecture or interior design firm
training its own image generation model). In such a case, the costs
should be internalized by the firm. Another case, when one firm uses
another firm’s generative AI platform, a contractual arrangement be­
tween the parties might be necessary, with companies relying on in­
surance to protect against any potential legal or business risks.
5.3. Policy choices in fringe cases
Another possible example where the issue of so-called “AI author­
ship” is raised relates to content generated from snippets of videos
captured by cameras embedded in various IoT devices (e.g., Ring
doorbell cameras or smart pet feeders such as Furbo). Such smart IoT
devices are initially installed by their owners who buy and place these
devices in their preferred locations: smart doorbells with cameras are
usually installed at the entrance door, while pet feeders are usually
positioned in the location of the room where the camera is able to
capture the “best view” of the space. Such smart IoT devices also have an
accompanying application, which users download onto their mobile
phones and can “opt-in” to get regular notifications and stitched videos
capturing the highlights of the day, a week, or a month.
The legal question is whether such content is copyrightable or not?
And, if so, who owns the content? The device maker? The device owner?
Nobody?70
To address these questions, we would like to make two observations.
First, the videos that are captured, stored, and processed by companies
selling such “smart” IoT devices should not be considered as content that
is “autonomously generated by AI”. While it is true, that such videos are
captured by video cameras that automatically turn on when movement
is detected, such snippets or compilations thereof are a result of sensors
and software that are programmed to perform a specific function, i.e., to
recognise, categorize, and stitch the snippets together. Although some
might potentially turn out to be relevant, interesting, funny, or news­
worthy, such uses of smart IoT devices equipped with motion recogni­
tion sensors and night-vision cameras are not really at the core of
copyright.
Second, it is a matter of policy choice whether such content is
copyrightable or should be protected under certain contractual ar­
rangements between the device manufacturer and the owner/user of the
device. Notably, there is a software layer that combines computer vision
and data labelling technologies to recognize, categorize, and stitch the
snippets of content together. From an institutional perspective, the

Fig. 3. Situating creativity.

AI models. One question that needs to be addressed is whether the use of
publicly available data for training purposes is justifiable or not. More
precisely, we need to ask whether the reliance on such data by genera­
tive AI is sufficiently different from earlier technologies to justify
excluding the works that are created using generative AI tools from the
scope of copyright protection.
Our intention is not to answer this question here but merely to
provide greater clarity and precision to the issues that need to be
resolved as we move forward. It is important that this question of
training data does not “crowd out” the discussion about the key justi­
fications of copyright law and originality; questions of copyright should
not be reduced to this issue of the data used to train underlying models
that power AI solutions.
This danger seems particularly unfortunate when combined with an
account that locates the key moment of creativity at the point where the
black box of the AI systems generate content. A privileging of this aspect
of the creative process, seems likely to result in a myopic emphasis on
the status of the training data, whereas a more nuanced account of
creativity shifts the focal point of the discussion towards the issue of
originality and human authorship explored here. And just to reiterate,
this is not to deny the importance of these questions, merely to highlight
how the black box moment is only one – albeit very important stage – in
a more nuanced and complex process (Fig. 3).
Another distinct question that we would like to highlight here relates
to the question of whether the legality of the use of publicly available
data for training purposes should be included in assessing the originality
of the output created by the user of the generative AI platform. More­
over, and crucially, when we talk about consumer-facing AI platforms
like Chat-GPT or Midjourney, it seems unfair that the question of the
lawfulness of the use of training data, in general, is added to the copy­
rightability assessment of an individual work created by an individual
using that generative AI system. More specifically, the burden (and cost)
for sorting out the legality of the training data conundrum should be
placed on the shoulders of the platform providing the generative AI
system rather than the individual user that merely used it as one element
of the creative process as described in Section 2 above.
A final consideration as to the relevance of the training data is
whether the generative AI tools are used by an individual user/creator or

70
By way of illustration, the Ring Terms of Service provide that “You are
solely responsible for all of your Content (including Content you share through
the Ring Neighbors feature or application). “Content” means all audio, video,
images, text, or other types of content captured by Products or provided to us
(including content posted by you) in connection with the Services. You repre­
sent and warrant that:(a) you own the intellectual property rights in Content
posted by you or otherwise have the right to post the Content and grant the
license set forth below, and (b) the posting and use of your Content on or
through the Services does not violate the privacy rights, publicity rights,
copyrights, contract rights, intellectual property rights or any other rights of
any person.” <https://ring.com/terms> accessed 29 August 2023.The Terms
and Conditions of Furmo, a camera-equipped smart pet feeder are less clear:
“Our Service may allow you to publicly share and otherwise make available
certain information, graphics, videos, or other material (“Content”), including,
without limitation, Content captured through or in connection with your use of
the Services. … You are solely responsible for the Content that you publicly
upload, transmit, share or otherwise disseminate on and through the Services,
including its legality, reliability, and appropriateness.” <https://furbo.
com/us/pages/terms-conditions> accessed 30 August 2023.

11

M. Fenwick and P. Jurcys

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 51 (2023) 105892

responsibility to decide on copyright ownership may lie with either (a)
the policymaker, who has to make a decision on this issue, or (b) the
camera maker, who sets forth the solution in the terms of use, which the
buyer of the device must agree to and live with. Such a policy choice
with regard to copyrightability and the allocation of initial title to the
content captured by smart IoT devices could be deemed as a layer of a
higher-level normative framework. The debate about content captured
by sensor-equipped cameras, such as capturing cats, dogs, and mailmen
around houses, distracts us from the broader conversation about the
purpose of copyright, which traditionally centers around human
creators.
More specifically, The Firefighter case in the US,71 where a gas
maintenance station employee captured a photo of a fireman carrying a
baby out of a destroyed building following an explosion in Oklahoma
City provides an illustration of the policy choice at stake. In this case, the
question was whether the photo was a work made for hire, or whether it
was a sole-authorship work? Situations might usefully be framed as law
and economics issues: Who is in a better position to utilize or monetize
the photo, the employee or the employer? As such, they might be best
thought of as case-by-case decisions, and it is impossible for the regu­
lator to anticipate all such scenarios. On a more general note, we again
reiterate the view that videos captured by security cameras are not
“works that are autonomously generated by AI.” Shifting attention to
that aspect to answer the question of whether it is copyrightable seems,
once again, overly reductive and simplistic.

As such, it is important that new concepts and terminology are
developed that more accurately characterize the forms of creativity
emerging in our rapidly evolving digital culture. We prefer the idea of
“co-creation of works with AI tools” as this type of expression seems to
capture the hybrid character of the creative process that is happening in
the generative AI space right now. We believe that our effort to unfold
the five dimensions of human authorship in creating works by using
generative AI tools (i.e., conception, prompting, generation, refinement
and deployment) can shed new light on the legal concept of human
authorship which during the 19th and 20th centuries increasingly shif­
ted focus from the author to the work.72
In this context, we might borrow Lawrence Lessig’s term “remix” and
think about how it might be deployed in an age of generative AI.
Crucially, this concept points to an essential feature of digital culture,
namely the centrality of quotation and iteration, and our struggles with
imagining the future and developing new artistic forms.73 Perhaps, the
only or, at least, best response to a culture where we struggle to imagine
the future is remixing and recycling – a self-conscious, often ironic,
revisiting and repackaging of the past – and in that respect AI tools offer
a contemporary and timely means to navigate the impasse of the current
historical moment.
From a legal perspective, our purpose here has been to suggest that
the low threshold of creativity in US copyright law is easily met in a case
such as David Guetta’s. Nevertheless, further research is needed to
analyse more specific use cases involving music, voice, multiple gener­
ative art segments, as well as the use of specific applications across these
different media. As such, we need to have an open and enlightened
discussion about hard or fringe cases, where there may well be far less
human creativity than discussed here, and a more restrictive approach
may be justified.
Our conclusion is that when it comes to genuine creators, who are
using AI systems as innovative and unique tools to push the boundaries
of their creativity, copyright law remains one of the primary mecha­
nisms to facilitate them in this pursuit. Exaggerated claims about the
role and capacity of AI in creation and possible flaws in the training data
of such models should not be used as a mechanism or justification to
curtail the discussion, stifle creativity, and limit opportunities to use AI
tools in pushing digital culture forwards and in new interesting
directions.

6. Conclusions
The main claim of this paper is that current copyright law in the US
provides a durable framework that can and should manage a Guetta-like
case. However, such an accommodation does raise several novel issues
and questions, first, about the relationship between humans and ma­
chines in the creative process and, secondly, about the shifting character
of the network of relevant stakeholders implicated in this process.
Our main argument here seeks to clarify the notion of an AIgenerated work – as used in many provocative recent headlines. Our
point is to emphasize that there is no such thing as purely AI-generated
work, at least not yet, and that there is always a human/author in the
loop of the creative. The idea of “AI-generated work” is overly simplistic
and potentially misleading and does a disservice to those seeking to
experiment creatively with generative AI systems. Even more so, the
notion of “AI-generated work” implies that AI can act completely
autonomously in generating AI content - something that is not factually
true. As we try to show in the paper using the Guetta example, human/
author involvement usually occurs either at the input (prompting) or
output stage; and the creation of somewhat creative works usually re­
quires human intervention and refinement of interim iterations of a
work.

