A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Artificial intelligence technology
Traditional Chinese opera
Stage engineering
Bivariate t-value check
Chinese opera

To combine traditional Chinese opera with modern intelligent technology, we use Artificial In­
telligence (AI) technology to conduct innovative research on traditional stage design. In this
paper, we mainly focused on the production of scientific and technological equipment for stage
design, the cooperation between intelligent technology and opera culture creation, and the stage
design effect and the overall stage effect after the introduction of AI technology. We elaborate on
the background of AI in traditional opera art creation space and associate it with the internet
collaborative creation from multiple angles through the survey as satisfaction, staff salary dif­
ference, calculation comparison, etc. The performance analysis study reveals that combining
traditional Chinese opera with AI resulted in significant performance efficiency compared to
conventional techniques.

1. Introduction
Each scene in traditional Chinese opera art contains the five components of "gold, wood, water, fire, and earth" cooperating, among
which the stage of the earth system acts as the carrier, the gold soldier Ge, fire pottery, water system apparel, and wood furnishings.
According to Mei Chen [1], the clothes and items directly connected to the performers were the first to appear in the performance
before the set progressively arose. Every scene on stage, props, costumes, and even the curtain are carefully studied; each opera has its
place, perhaps a table, sometimes a cup; even such small details, like the performers on stage, are indispensable, are closely related,
and together staged a gorgeous visual feast for the audience; this is the charm of traditional opera.
Randolph [2] revealed that traditional opera art is more than just props and sets; it is used to foil the performer’s green leaves, a sad
are hidden in it, and sometimes it changed, becoming the focus of the normal stage, such as according to Mr. Lao She novel of the same
name, the camel Xiang Zi in the set design, the old Beijing city gate and city walls, metaphor the old China will collapse, the deep
connotation of the audience deeply as
Tallón Ballesteros [3] stated that in the early traditional opera stage engineering, pure handwork was generally used to create
various props, and the materials were greatly consumed, time-consuming, and laborious, resulting in the expensive price of props and
the rare quantity, and the production is difficult to supply large-scale commercial performances, which is also the reason for the
high-ticket price of song-and-dance duet popular in the Northeast [3].
The biggest difference between the song-and-dance duet popular in the Northeast and the adaptation is to pull scene requirements
with a full set of opera stage facilities, and the play can use more modern stage elements, such as Light Emitting Diode (LED) display

This paper is for special section VSI-sacs Reviews were processed by Guest Editor Dr. Antonio Zuorro and recommended for publication.
E-mail address: mohayasr6819@gmail.com.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.108395
Received 23 June 2022; Received in revised form 7 September 2022; Accepted 12 September 2022
Available online 24 September 2022
0045-7906/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Computers and Electrical Engineering 103 (2022) 108395

Z. Yang

instead of cloth embroidery background, even with modern clothing instead of traditional Peking Opera costumes, etc. Section 2
discusses Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology for the opera art environment. Section 3 discusses multi-entity collaboration in the
formation of theatrical culture in the Internet era. Section 4 discusses the stage design effect and the overall stage effect following the
implementation of AI technology. The conclusion is presented in Section 5.
2. AI Equipment of opera art space
2.1. Existing AI equipment for opera stage choreography
Three Dimensional (3D) Printer: Ding and Ng [4] said that 3D printing is a type of fast-forming technology, also known as additive
manufacturing, that is based on digital model files and uses adhesive materials such as powder metal or plastic to produce products
layer-by-layer printing. Potter Phillip [5] revealed that 3D printing is typically implemented using a digital technology material
printer, which works on a similar principle to a standard printer but with a few differences. Standard printer print material is paper and
toner, whereas 3D printer print material is a variety of metals, ceramics, plastics, and so on. And, unlike a regular printer, which prints
two-dimensional planes on paper, a 3D printer prints three-dimensional objects. This technique was sometimes referred to as 3D stereo
printing technology. According to Najarian [6], 3D printers were frequently employed in the manufacture of models in mold
manufacturing and industrial design and were subsequently gradually utilized in the direct fabrication of various items, with parts
produced using this technology. Jewelry, footwear, industrial design, architecture, engineering and construction, automotive, aero­
space, dentistry, and medical sectors all use the technology. Faraz [7] was aware that Charles Hull, an American scientist, invented the
first commercial 3D printing process in 1986. Over the next four decades, experts from around the country dedicated themselves to
inventing 3D printers for use in a variety of areas. 3D printers are not unique in today’s science and technology, since they can be found
in all aspects of life.
Six-axis processing lathe (processing center): Tallón Ballesteros [3] stated that clothe processing is part of machining and that there
are primarily two types of processing: one is to fix the blade and process the unformed workpiece in the rotation; the other is to fix the
piece through high-speed rotation, horizontal and longitudinal movement of the blade (frame). Drill head, hole expansion drill, hinge
knife, silk cone, plate teeth, and rolling tools on the lathe is the most often used type of machine tools in mechanical production and
repair industries, and it is mostly used for processing shafts, discs, covers, and other workpieces with rotational surfaces.
Sewing machine with Computer Numerical Control (CNC) embroidery: According to Mei Chen [1], an embroidery machine is a special
sewing machine that can be directly through the Internet embroidery design, construct the pattern, and then let the machine auto­
matically work for embroidery, abandoning the complicated steps of manual operation, and the embroidery machine can be operated
by only one person through electronic modeling, convenient method, and easy operation. And the design generated is delicate and
silky, much like hand embroidery weaved.
Fig. 1 Shows the path of AI set in the stage design space. It consists of the below components.
• Computer 3D modeling: A 3D model made using a computer;
• Graphic Artist Designer: Art designs a 3D model;
• 3D printing: Printing was performed using the 3D model designed to produce;
• 3D cutting:Cut off the printed items;
• 3D clipping:The cleaved 3D model was trimmed;
• Wax mold:Wax xed items that have been 3D printed;
• Replace wax:Remove the wax particles from the item;
• Computer embroidery:Texture analysis is used to import the embroidery into an embroidery sewing machine for AI embroidery;

Fig. 1. Application path of AI set in the stage design space.
2

Computers and Electrical Engineering 103 (2022) 108395

Z. Yang

• NC sewing:Do the embroidery sewing machine for the embroidery processing;
• NC sewing:Ironing of the obtained embroidery products;
• Fine grinding: The resulting products will be finely processed;
• Coloring/assembly: Color the products already obtained and;
• Forming:Get the product for use.
Fig. 1 depicts the combination of conventional opera stage engineering with AI via computer plane design and 3D stereo modeling.
Such enormous objects may be detailed and polished by using a 3D printer and 3D cutting. The coloring may then be completed, and
minor props can be cut. The CNC embroidery machine is used to process iron-on cloth art goods. The six-axis processing center will
handle the whole operation.
2.2. Use of AI to reproduce traditional props
Tilt photography in three dimensions, based on a revolving platform. Slant photogrammetry was employed by Ahirwal [8]. Slant
photogrammetry is a novel technique developed in recent years, allowing for simultaneous photography from numerous angles using
several sensors on the same aircraft platform. Tilt photography means that he can capture measurements at a 45˚angle at a low height,
allowing for higher-resolution aerial photos. Unlike standard projections, they can not only shoot from a vertical viewpoint but also
five or more angles, considerably improving data collecting efficiency. In this work, reference photos were used for stage photography
and 3D stereo modeling.
Randolph [2] demonstrated texture analysis by acquiring images and extracting processing techniques to extract texture feature
parameters. By integrating technology with an embroidered sewing machine, you may learn the directional quantitative description of
the texture. Stage props can have the same texture as handcrafted props.
Fig. 2 shows the traditional prop engraving scheme of AI. It consists of below components.
• Tilt camera PTZ: Use the tilt photography cloud platform for photography;
• Smart 3D synthesis: The collected images were subjected to 3D synthesis;
• 3D prop model: The resultant 3D image model was processed specifically;
• Cutting drive code: The resulting model was cut and made;
• Printer driver code: Part of the 3D model was printed;
• Laser scanning: Items that require embroidery for laser scanning;
• Texture analysis: The results of the props were scanned for texture scan analysis;
• Pin analysis: A more detailed analysis of the texture analysis;
• Sewing machine drive code: large areas of props were made for sewing; and
• Embroidery machine driver code: More detailed needle embroidery for embroidery production.
To make AI engraving props to achieve the purpose of traditional handmade props, large props using tilt photography platform for
multi-angle shooting to collect props related data, data input into the computer, using smart3D data synthesis, and build 3D props
model, get large props electronic mold, using 3D printer cutting and printing, finally color assembly into large props. Small props
principle is similar, first using laser scanning, scanning its texture structure, and then use computer texture analysis, then use smart3D
data synthesis, and build 3D props model, then use 3D printer cutting and printing, details embroidery uses needle analysis, needle
sequence code input, can use digital embroidery sewing machine embroidery to refine details complete props.
3. Multi-entity collaboration of drama culture creation in the internetþ Era
The Internet+ economic model is based on the comprehensive division of labor and tight coordination of tiny business organi­
zations, which is equally relevant in drama stage artworks. According to traditional Chinese opera art, each scene includes five
components that collaborate: "gold, wood, water, fire, earth." The stage project is likewise produced following its five elements.
Fig. 3 shows the Internet+ opera cluster creation system. It consists of below the components.

Fig. 2. Traditional prop engraving scheme of AI.
3

Computers and Electrical Engineering 103 (2022) 108395

Z. Yang

• Drama dance planning: Opera stage art for the overall stage design;
• 3D modeling: Based on the 3D model being built as required;
• 3D design: Design and production of the 3D model were performed;
• Wumei weapon processing: Make the weapons needed for the stage;
• Wumei furniture processing: Make the furniture needed for the stage;
• Dance costume processing: Make the costumes needed for the stage;
• Wumei porcelain processing: Make the porcelain needed for the stage; and
• Dance curtain processing: Make the curtain needed for the stage.
Fig. 3 depicts the Internet and opera culture’s combined creation. The traditional mode’s drama stage is entirely hired by its troupe.
The stage props will be changed after each performance, using significant personnel and material resources. And, using the opera art
planning draught, a new AI mode connected to the Internet may develop 3D modeling, as well as stage scene furniture, weapons,
clothes, porcelain, and curtains based on the five aspects of ancient China, as categorized by many intelligent technology businesses.
Unified the opera stage personnel assembly and planning, resulting in cost savings and a reduction in production time.
4. Impact analysis using AI technology
4.1. . Bivariate t-calibration algorithm
Elsevier [9] had told that the t-test, also known as the student t-test (Student’s t-test), was mainly used for a normal distribution
with a small sample content (e. g., n < 30) and the overall standard deviation is unknown. The t-test is to infer the probability of the
difference occurring by the t-distribution theory, and thus to compare whether the difference between the two averages is significant.
The t-value formula:
t=

|X − μ0 | X − μ0
= √̅̅̅
SX
s/ n

(1)

where, t represents Bivariate t-value test, X represents variables required for the test, μ0 represents fixed constant, SX represents the
mean synthesis of the variables tested and n represents the number of variables tested.
4.2. P-value
Tinnirello [10] had used that the P-value. The P-value is the probability that results are more extreme than the resulting sample
observations appear when the null hypothesis is true. If the P-value is small, the probability of the null hypothesis is small, and the
smaller the P-value, the more significant the results. In this study, the setting was considered significantly significant between the two
data groups when T < 10.000 and P < 0.01. Throw a coin 20 times with 14 frontal appearances, drawing the occurrence probability of
the event as a normal distribution, then the one-sided P-value of the sample was calculated as follows:
Prob(14 heads) + Prob(15 heads) + … + Prob(20 heads)
[( ) ( )
( )]
1
20
20
20
60, 460
+
+…+
=
≈ 0.058
20
14
15
20
1, 048, 576
2

(2)

where, Prob represents get the required situation.
4.3. Practitioner income survey
The actors include wrist horns such as ugliness, gongs, drums, silk tube musicians, and dance actors. The backstage includes stage
props, the director group, production group, production, and group staff [11–17]. This study was sampled in various Peking Opera
troupes around Beijing, with some actors, backstage staff, and producers’ salaries and compared, and recorded in Table 1:

Fig. 3. The Internet + opera culture creation system related to the stage choreography.
4

Computers and Electrical Engineering 103 (2022) 108395

Z. Yang

• Traditional mode: Salary and profit of each staff member in the traditional mode;
• AI model: Salary and profit of each staff member in the AI mode;
• The average price: Average fare in two different modes;
• The average daily wage for an actor: The average salary of an actor in both modes;
• Background daily wage: Average salary for background staff in both modes; and
• Yield of the producer: The profits that the producers reap in both modes.
According to the statistics in Table 1, the conventional mode’s ticket price is about six times that of the AI mode, but the daily
compensation of actors is around the same. When combined with the high daily wage in the background and the producer’s revenue,
the traditional mode’s ticket price income is largely utilized for the manual backdrop set and the material cost of manual production. In
contrast, the AI model resulted in much-reduced ticket prices and lower wages for background workers [17–24].
Fig. 4 shows below factors:
• The average daily wage for an actor: The average salary of an actor in both modes;
• Background daily wage: Average salary for background staff in both modes; and
• Yield of the producer: The profits that the producers reap in both modes.
The ratio increases the difference between the conventional and AI mode means in Table 1 and Fig. 4. The t and P are calculated
using the results of a bivariate T-test run by the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) analytic program on two different types of
data. When T < 10.000 and P < 0.01, a statistically significant difference between the two data groups were considered.
4.4. Organizational efficiency analysis
Under the premise of the fixed script and complete rehearsal, a commercial performance of about 2 h of opera needs to conduct
stage confirmation, market publicity, stage processing and deployment, stage test stage, and other preparatory processes in advance.
After the performance, dismantle the stage props, restore the stage and return the rental equipment are needed. This study also
investigated the staff of Peking Opera troupes around Beijing and sorted out in Table 2:
The factors in Table 2 are summarized below.
• Traditional mode: Time and preparation efficiency required in the traditional model;
• AI model: Time and preparation efficiency required in the AI mode;
• Performance times:Performance time required in both modes;
• Preparation time:Preparation time required in both modes;
• End time:End time required in both modes;
• Salary cycle:Salary counting cycle in both modes; and
• Preparation efficiency:Preparation efficiency in both modes.
In Table 2, the increase calculation is the ratio of the difference between the traditional mode mean and the AI mode means. The T
and P are obtained from the results of a bivariate T-test performed by the SPSS analysis software on two different modes of data. A
significant statistical difference between the two data groups was considered when at T < 10.000 and P < 0.01.
4.5. Audience and practitioner satisfaction questionnaire
After investigating the performance efficiency and the compensation of all parties, this study investigated the satisfaction of the
audience in the surveyed area and their practitioners with the opera performance using the AI mode, and calculated in Table 3.
The factors in Table 2 are summarized below:
• AI model: The satisfaction of the audience, practitioners and producers with the stage in the AI mode;
• Audience degree of satisfaction: Audience satisfaction with the stage in both modes;
• Audience complaint rate:Audience complaint rate about the stage in both modes;
• Performer degree of satisfaction:Performer satisfaction with both modes;
Table 1
Compensation and income calculation of actors, backstage and producers (Data source: The author calculated the proceeds).
Grouping

The average price
yuan/RMB

The average daily wage for an actor
yuan/RMB

Background daily wage
yuan/RMB

Yield of the producer
%

traditional mode
AI mode
t
P

1827.5
363.8
0.136
0.002

826.5
967.3
8.283
0.008

1512.5
846.9
3.152
0.006

12.6
18.6
6.351
0.007

5

Computers and Electrical Engineering 103 (2022) 108395

Z. Yang

Fig. 4. Visualization of the salary and income survey of actors, backstage, and producers.
Table 2
Performance organization efficiency test table (Data source: The author calculated the proceeds).
grouping

Performance times
h

Preparation time
d

End time
d

Salary cycle
d

Preparation efficiency
%

Traditional mode
AI mode
t
P

2
2
99.999
0.000

5.0
2.1
3.752
0.006

1.3
1.1
1.784
0.004

6.3
3.2
3.526
0.006

1.39
2.78
3.471
0.006

Table 3
Satisfaction survey results table (Data source: The author calculated the proceeds).
GROUPING

audience
degree of satisfaction

complaint rate

performer
degree of satisfaction

backstage
degree of satisfaction

Producer
degree of satisfaction

traditional mode
AI model
t
P

63.7
70.2
0.658
0.003

6.3
3.8
3.239
0.006

68.4
75.5
1.472
0.004

57.4
70.8
1.937
0.004

80.9
94.3
1.653
0.004

• Backstage degree of satisfaction:Background staff satisfaction with both models;
• Producer degree of satisfaction:Investor satisfaction with both models;and
• Traditional mode: The traditional mode satisfies the audience, practitioners and producers with the stage.
Fig. 5 and Table 3 show the influence of the AI mode on the stage project. Both the preparation and completion times are
significantly shorter than the typical manner of a production stage project. At the same time of performance, the AI preparation time is
considerably less than the classic mode preparation time. In other words, AI enhances the overall efficiency of stage preparation,

Fig. 5. Visual figure of the satisfaction survey.
6

Computers and Electrical Engineering 103 (2022) 108395

Z. Yang

allowing for more stage performances to be prepared at the same time.
According to Table 3, the audience response to two various types of opera stage response is not different, but actor and background
staff satisfaction differs. The classic-style stage scenario needs a large number of people and material resources, particularly in the
background crew. And, while background staff salaries are decreased in AI mode, the cost of material resources is also significantly cut.
Similarly, the AI model has a favorable impression among the producers. Although the ticket price has been cut, the efficiency has been
substantially increased, as have the producers’ returns.
5. Conclusion
The AI system takes data from cameras, GPS, the car’s radar, and cloud services to generate control signals that allow the vehicle to
function. AI is a broad tool that enables people to reimagine how we combine information, analyze data, and apply the resultant
insights to make better decisions—and it is already impacting every aspect of life. We presented the AI mode of opera culture
development mode and production process, and compare it with the traditional Chinese traditional opera development mode. We
studied the AI mode using 3D printing technology, CNC embroidery sewing technology, tilt photography cloud platform, and other
technology opera stage production. Different from the traditional mode of the opera production process, AI mode according to the way
of five elements of the required props production process, make the production process clear, more convenient, and fast. Compared
with the traditional mode of the opera stage, all walks of life also appreciate the opera stage of new AI more. Large props employed a
tilt photography platform for multi-angle shooting to acquire props-related data to create AI engraved props that perform the same
purpose as traditional hand-made props. After entering the data into the computer, smart3D data synthesis had utilized to create a 3D
model of the props. Large props have then given an electronic mold cut and manufactured using a 3D printer. Small props function in
the same way. We began by scanning its texture structure with a laser scanner. The computer had then used to examine the texture.
Following that, we created a 3D model of the prop using smart3D data synthesis. In embroidery, needle analysis and needle sequence
code input were employed. To improve details and complete props, we employed a digital embroidered sewing machine.
Data availability
The data underlying the results presented in the study are available within the manuscript.
Funding statement
This work was supported by Shanxi Philosophy and Social Science Foundation Project: Research on the Inheritance and Innovation
of Shanxi Opera Helmet Making Technique in the Context of Intangible Cultural Heritage (Project No. 2019B356). The fourth batch of
projects funded by young academic leaders of taiyuan normal University.
Declaration of Competing Interest
There is no potential conflict of interest in our paper, and all authors have seen the manuscript and approved to submit to your
journal. We confirm that the content of the manuscript has not been published or submitted for publication elsewhere.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
